# Alien Experiments

Group project for Applied Bioinformatics: Microbiome

**Group member** (lexigographical order): Anna Toidze, Marc Kesselring, Minghang Li, Willem Fütterer

## Tasks

Each of these tasks should be accompanied by one or more visualizations or tables (as appropriate): 

- [ ] 01. Sequence quality control. 
    - Appropriate quality control and filtering procedures should be applied. 
    - Appropriate denoising and/or clustering techniques should be applied, except if a group is given explicitly pre-processed data. 
- [ ] 02. Taxonomy classification. 
    - Appropriate taxonomy classification techniques should be applied and explained. 
    - Try different methods and databases — you do not need to include this in your report, but you could if the differences are meaningful (e.g., one database clearly gives better results). 
- [ ] 03. Alpha diversity analysis.
    - Should be estimated for all samples, and compared across the primary sample categories* (e.g., sample types or other main groups) and/or gradients* (e.g., age, space, time, pH, or other continuous sample metadata). 
    - Test out a few different metrics (including a phylogenetic metric) to see what they reveal. Apply appropriate statistical tests. 
- [ ] 04. Beta diversity analysis.
    - Should be measured and compared between the primary sample categories or gradients*. 
    - Test out a few different metrics (including a phylogenetic metric) to see what they reveal. Apply appropriate statistical tests. 
- [ ] 05. Which features are more/less abundant in different groups?
    - Apply appropriate statistical tests and/or supervised learning methods to answer this question. Consider carefully what types of features you want to compare between groups — maybe use different feature definitions (e.g., collapsed on taxonomy or functional information). 
- [ ] 06. [Optional] Functional prediction. 
    - We would probably use complementary methods to assess microbial functions in a real research/clinical/industrial context (e.g., targeted methods, culture-based methods, metagenomics, etc). That is not an option here, but you can pretend that you did! 
    - Use q2-picrust2 to predict the metagenome composition of your samples and use this to compare your primary categories or gradients.
    - Repeat beta diversity analysis based on predicted metagenome composition. 
- [ ] 07. Do something new. Part of this course is learning how to read and use bioinformatics documentation! 
    - Pick a method that we did not learn about in class, and which will add value to your group project (especially if it relates to one of the specific objectives of your group project). 
    - Install it, use it, and present your results! This could be a QIIME 2 plugin or action that we did not use, or different statistical or visualization packages for Python or even R.

## Local environment setup

> This is not tested and could take forever! Theoretically it should work.

You can create a local `conda` environment using 

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

By default it will create an environment named `qiime2`, and has the exact copy of the packages installed in the course's provided environemnt.

> The configuration file `environment.yml` was generated by:
> ```bash
> conda env export --from-history | grep -v "^prefix: " > environment-pig.yml
> ```
> Combining the channel information showed in `conda env export`, and modified the `name` accordingly.
